% !TeX root = RJwrapper.tex
\title{iccCounts: An R Package to Estimate the Intraclass Correlation
Coefficient for Assessing Agreement with Count Data}
\author{by Josep L. Carrasco}

\maketitle

\abstract{%
The intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) is a widely used index to
assess agreement with continuous data. The common approach for
estimating the ICC involves estimating the variance components of a
linear mixed model under assumptions such as linearity and normality of
effects. However, if the outcomes are counts these assumptions are not
met and the ICC estimates are biased and inefficient. In this situation,
it is necessary to use alternative approaches that are better suited for
count data. Here, the iccCounts R package is introduced for estimating
the ICC under the Poisson, Negative Binomial, Zero-Inflated Poisson and
Zero-Inflated Negative Binomial distributions. The utility of the
iccCounts package is illustrated by three examples that involve the
assessment of repeatability and concordance with count data.
}

\hypertarget{introduction}{%
\section{Introduction}\label{introduction}}

Repeated measurements are often collected and hierarchically structured
in clusters (commonly, in subjects). These repeated measurements can be
interchangeable within subjects (i.e.~they are replicates). This case is
often known as the evaluation of repeatability \citep{nakagawa2010} or
intra-rater reliability \citep{DeVet2011}. Moreover, the repeated
measurements may be structured (not interchangeable) because they were
obtained under different experimental conditions, involving different
methods or observers. In this case the analysis of agreement is often
known as concordance analysis, method comparison analysis
\citep{Choudhary2017} or inter-rater reliability \citep{DeVet2011}.

Whatever the structure of the repeated measurements, the intraclass
correlation coefficient (ICC) is a common index used to assess agreement
with continuous data \citep{fleiss1986, carrasco2003}. The general
definition of the ICC is the ratio of the between-clusters variance to
the total variance. However, the appropriate ICC has to be defined to
afford the different variance components that are involved in the total
variance besides the between-clusters variance. These variance
components are typically estimated by means of a linear mixed model with
common assumptions: that there is linearity between the outcome
expectation and the effects (cluster, method,\ldots); and that the
random effects and the random error follow normal distributions.
Currently, there are several R packages that estimate the ICC under the
Normality assumption for assessing repeatability or concordance
\citep{Wolak2012, carrasco2013, Stoffel2017}.

However, if the outcomes are counts, such assumptions are not met and
the ICC estimates are biased and inefficient \citep{carrasco2005}. In
this situation, it is necessary to use alternative approaches that are
better suited to the properties of count data. The methodology for
estimating the ICC for non-normal distributions using generalized linear
mixed models (GLMM), and in particular for count data, was developed in
\citet{carrasco2010}. The ICC is therefore estimated by the variance
components from the appropriate GLMM. The cluster random effect is still
distributed as a Normal distribution but the within-cluster variability
is assumed to follow a probability distribution function for counts.
\citet{Stoffel2017} introduced the \CRANpkg{rptR} package which can be
used to estimate the ICC assuming a Poisson model for the
within-subjects variability.

In the \CRANpkg{iccCounts} package introduced here, besides the Poisson
distribution, other models as the Negative Binomial, the Zero-Inflated
Poisson and the Zero-Inflated Negative Binomial are also considered.
These models are useful when overdispersion arises in the Poisson model.
Overdispersion means that the variability assumed by the model is lower
than that from the data. Therefore, the within-subjects variability and,
by extension, the total variance are underestimated and the ICC and its
standard error are biased. Thus, the validity of the ICC estimate is
closely linked to the validity of the model, so that a goodness-of-fit
(GOF) analysis of the model must be performed.

The article is structured as follows: the \dfn{Methodology background}
section introduces the definition of the ICC, their expressions
depending on the model GLLM chosen, some inferential aspects and the
validation approach of the GLMM; the issues of the package are described
in \dfn{Package description} section; in \dfn{Examples} section three
examples are introduced. Two of them are cases of the repeatability
setting whereas the remaining one shows the case of a concordance
setting. Finally, the main contributions are summarized in the
\dfn{Conclusion} section.

\hypertarget{methodology-background}{%
\section{Methodology background}\label{methodology-background}}

\hypertarget{experimental-design}{%
\subsection{Experimental design}\label{experimental-design}}

As mentioned in the introduction, the experimental design depends on the
aim of the study: concordance or repeatability. In the case of a
concordance study, a sample of n subjects are measured m times by k
methods. In this setting, the aim is to analyse the degree of
concordance of the measurement methods when assessing the subjects. Note
that within-subjects repeated measurements are not interchangeable
because they belong to one specific method. It is worthy to noting that
the term ``methods'' is the conventional way to describe the
experimental condition of the repeated measurements across subjects in
this context, but it might be referred to differently name depending on
the context. In this setting, \(Y_{ijk}\) stands for the k-th reading
made by the j-th method on the i-th subject, with \(i=1,\ldots,n\),
\(j=1,\ldots,m\) and \(k=1,\ldots,s\). Hence, there will be three
variance components to consider when assessing agreement among the
repeated measurements: between-subjects, between-methods and random
error variabilities.

In a repeatability study, a sample of n subjects are measured m times.
In this case the repeated measurements share the same experimental
condition across subjects, therefore they can be considered as
interchangeable. Thus, in this setting \(Y_{ik}\) stands for the k-th
reading made on the i-th subject, with \(i=1,\ldots,n\), and
\(k=1,\ldots,s\). In this case, only two variance components are
involved in the evaluation of the agreement: between-subjects and random
error variabilities.

\hypertarget{generalized-linear-mixed-model}{%
\subsection{Generalized linear mixed
model}\label{generalized-linear-mixed-model}}

The estimation of the variance components is carried out by means of
generalized linear mixed models (GLMM). The GLMM for the concordance
setting (considering subjects and methods effects) is defined as
follows:

\begin{itemize}
\item
  Let \(\alpha_i\) and \(\beta_j\) be the subjects and methods random
  effects respectively, with \(i=1,\ldots,n\), \(j=1,\ldots,m\), that
  follow Normal distributions with mean 0 and variance
  \(\sigma_{\alpha}^2\) and \(\sigma_{\beta}^2\). Although the method
  effect could be a fixed effect by design, when defining the agreement
  index it is convenient to consider it as a random effect to account
  for the systematic differences between observers as a source of
  disagreement \citep{fleiss1986, carrasco2003}.
\item
  The conditional distribution of \(Y_{ijk}\) given \(\alpha_i\) and
  \(\beta_j\), \(f\left(Y_{ijk}|\alpha_i,\beta_j\right)\), is a
  probability density function from the exponential family.
\item
  The conditional mean of \(Y_{ijk}\) given \(\alpha_i\) and \(\beta_j\)
  is
\end{itemize}

\begin{equation}
\mu_{ij}=E\left(Y_{ijk}|\alpha_i,\beta_j\right)=g^{-1}\left(\lambda_i+\alpha_i+\beta_j\right).
\label{eq:glmm}
\end{equation}

where \(g\) is called the link function. Here, \(\lambda_i\) is the
linear combination of the mean modifying covariates for the i-th
subject. Furthermore, the conditional variance of \(Y_{ijk}\) given
\(\alpha_i\) and \(\beta_j\) is defined as
\(Var\left(Y_{ijk}|\alpha_i,\beta_j\right)=\phi h\left(\mu_{ij}\right)\)
where \(\phi\) is the dispersion parameter and \(h\left(\right)\) is
variance function.

If the methods effect is removed, the GLMM for the repeatability setting
is obtained. Thus, depending on the nature of the data the appropriate
conditional probability model and link function must be chosen. When
analysing count data, the logarithm is commonly used as a link function
and models such as Poisson or Negative Binomial are considered.

\hypertarget{intraclass-correlation-coefficient-for-count-data}{%
\subsection{Intraclass correlation coefficient for count
data}\label{intraclass-correlation-coefficient-for-count-data}}

The intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) is calculated as:

\begin{equation}
ICC=\frac{Cov\left(Y_{ijk},Y_{ij'k'}\right)}{Var\left(Y_{ijk}\right)}.
\label{eq:icc}
\end{equation}

where the \(Cov\left(Y_{ijk},Y_{ij'k'}\right)\) is the marginal (over
subjects and observers) covariance between any pair of data from the
same subject, whereas \(Var\left(Y_{ijk}\right)\) is the marginal
variance of data.

Furthermore, the marginal variance and covariance can be developed as
functions of the GLMM parameters \citep{carrasco2010}:

\begin{equation}
ICC=\frac{Cov\left(\mu_{ij},\mu_{ij'}\right)}{Var\left(\mu_{ij}\right)+E\left(\phi h\left(\mu_{ij}\right)\right)}
\label{eq:icc2}
\end{equation}

This result allows the ICC to be generalized to any distribution fitted
with a GLMM.

\citet{carrasco2010} developed the ICC for Poisson and Negative Binomial
distributions, the latter with variance increasing quadratically with
the mean (NegBin2),
\(Var\left(Y_{ijk}|\alpha_i,\beta_j\right)=\mu_{ij} \left(1+r\mu_{ij}\right)\)
(Table \ref{table:tableICC}). A Negative Binomial model with variance
increasing linearly with the mean is also considered (NegBin1)
\citep{brooks2017, hardin2007},
\(Var\left(Y_{ijk}|\alpha_i,\beta_j\right)=\mu_{ij} \left(1+r\right)\).
It is worth to noting that NegBin1 does not belong to the exponential
family \citep{hardin2007}, therefore this model would not be a proper
GLMM. However, it can still be useful to model count data that show
overdispersion in a Poisson model.

Additionally, it is possible to define the ICC for the cases of zero
inflated models (Table \ref{table:tableICC}). Let's define \(B_{ijk}\)
as a Bernoulli variable that takes a value of 1 if the reading \(k\) on
subject \(i\) and method \(j\) is a structural zero with probability
\(\pi\) and 0 otherwise. The observed data, \(X_{ijk}\) is the result of
\(X_{ijk}=Y_{ijk}\left(1-B_{ijk}\right)\), where \(Y_{ijk}\) is the
count variable as defined before. The marginal covariance and variance
of \(X_{ijk}\) are:

\begin{equation}
Cov\left(X_{ijk},X_{ij'k'}\right)=Cov\left(Y_{ijk},Y_{ij'k'}\right)\left(1-\pi\right)^2
\label{eq:cov}
\end{equation}

\begin{equation}
Var\left(X_{ijk}\right)=Var\left(Y_{ijk}\right)\left(1-\pi\right)+E^2\left(Y_{ijk}\right)\pi\left(1-\pi\right)
\label{eq:var}
\end{equation}

and the general expression of the ICC for zero-inflated data becomes:

\begin{equation}
ICC=\frac{Cov\left(Y_{ijk},Y_{ij'k'}\right)\left(1-\pi\right)}{Var\left(Y_{ijk}\right)+E^2\left(Y_{ijk}\right)\pi}
\label{eq:icc3}
\end{equation}

where \(\pi\) stands for the probability of excess of zeros.

Notice that ICCs appearing in Table \ref{table:tableICC} are for the
concordance setting where \(\sigma^2_\beta\) stands for the variability
between methods. The ICCs for the repeatability setting are obtained
just removing \(\sigma^2_\beta\) from the equations, i.e.~by setting
\(\sigma^2_\beta=0\).

\begin{table}[h]
\begin{center}
\begin{minipage}{14cm}
\bgroup\small
\begin{tabular}{|l|c|c||l|c|c|}
\hline
Model & ICC & $\theta$ & Model & ICC & $\theta$ \\ \hline
Poisson & $\frac{\mu\left(e^{\sigma_\alpha^2}-1\right)}{\mu\left(e^{\sigma_\alpha^2+\sigma_\beta^2}-1\right)+1}$ & $\left(\mu,\sigma_\alpha^2,\sigma_\beta^2\right)$ & ZIP & $\frac{\mu\left(e^{\sigma_\alpha^2}-1\right)\left(1-\pi\right)}{\mu\left(e^{\sigma_\alpha^2+\sigma_\beta^2}-1\right)+1+\mu\pi}$ & $\left(\mu,\sigma_\alpha^2,\sigma_\beta^2\right)$\\ \hline
NegBin1 & $\frac{\mu\left(e^{\sigma_\alpha^2}-1\right)}{\mu\left(e^{\sigma_\alpha^2+\sigma_\beta^2}-1\right)+r+1}$ & $\left(\mu,\sigma_\alpha^2,\sigma_\beta^2, r\right)$ & ZI-NegBin1 & $\frac{\mu\left(e^{\sigma_\alpha^2}-1\right)\left(1-\pi\right)}{\mu\left(e^{\sigma_\alpha^2+\sigma_\beta^2}-1\right)+1+r+\mu\pi}$ & $\left(\mu,\sigma_\alpha^2,\sigma_\beta^2, r, \pi \right)$\\ \hline
NegBin2 & $\frac{\mu\left(e^{\sigma_\alpha^2}-1\right)}{\mu\left(\left(r+1\right)e^{\sigma_\alpha^2+\sigma_\beta^2}-1\right)+1}$ & $\left(\mu,\sigma_\alpha^2,\sigma_\beta^2, r \right)$ & ZI-NegBin2 & $\frac{\mu\left(e^{\sigma_\alpha^2}-1\right)\left(1-\pi\right)}{\mu\left(\left(r+1\right)e^{\sigma_\alpha^2+\sigma_\beta^2}-1\right)+1+\mu\pi}$ & $\left(\mu,\sigma_\alpha^2,\sigma_\beta^2, r, \pi \right)$ \\
\hline
\end{tabular}
\egroup
\caption{\footnotesize{ICC expressions. NegBin1 and NegBin2 are the Negative Binomial models with variance increasing linearly and quadratically  with the mean  respectively; ZI are the zero-inflated models. $\theta$ stand for parameters involved in ICC: $\mu$ stands for the marginal mean; $\sigma^2_\alpha$ is the between-subjects variance; $\sigma^2_\beta$ is the between-methods variability; $r$ is the Negative Binomial's dispersion parameter; and $\pi$ is the probability of excess of zeros.}}
\label{table:tableICC}
\end{minipage}
\end{center}
\end{table}

\hypertarget{estimation-of-icc}{%
\subsection{Estimation of ICC}\label{estimation-of-icc}}

The estimation of the ICC involves estimating the GLMM parameters.
However, maximum likelihood approach is not straightforward because
there is no closed analytical expression for the marginal likelihood
besides the Normal case (linear mixed model). Thus, it is necessary to
apply numerical methods to approximate the marginal likelihood and to
obtain maximum likelihood estimates \citep{Bolker2009}. With regards to
the standard error of the ICC, let \(\theta\) be the GLMM parameters
involved in the ICC expression (see Table \ref{table:tableICC}) and
\(\Sigma\) the variance-covariance matrix of \(\theta\). The asymptotic
standard error can be estimated by applying the delta method
\citep{verHoef2012}:

\begin{equation}
Var\left(ICC\right) \approx \Delta'\Sigma\Delta
\label{eq:varicc}
\end{equation}

where \(\Delta\) stand for the vector containing the derivatives of ICC
respect to \(\theta\). Confidence intervals for the ICC are based on
asymptotic Normal distribution using the inverse hyperbolic tangent
function or Fisher's Z-transformation \citep{carrasco2003}.

\hypertarget{validation}{%
\subsection{Validation}\label{validation}}

The goodness-of-fit (GOF) analysis can be carried out by the computation
of randomized quantile residuals (RQR) \citep{Dunn1996, Feng2020}.
Briefly, the GOF analysis involve the comparison of the RQR from the
original data to those obtained by simulation under the fitted model.
Simulations of counts based on the fitted model are generated and the
model is refitted to each simulated dataset. Using the simulated RQR,
envelopes are built as the appropriate quantiles (in relation to the
level of significance) of RQR from the refitted models. If the model
fits correctly the data it is expected that the original RQR will
completely lie within the simulated envelopes.

Additionally, dispersion as well as zero-inflation can be checked by
comparing the dispersion and proportion of zeros from the simulated data
to those from the original data. Thus, tests for dispersion and zero
inflation are carried out by comparing the RQR dispersion and the number
of zeros from the original model and data to those from the refitted
models and simulated data.

\hypertarget{package-description}{%
\section{Package description}\label{package-description}}

The main function in the \CRANpkg{iccCounts} package is
\dfn{icc\_counts} which estimates the ICC under different models for
count data. The argument \dfn{data} identifies the data set to be
analysed. This data set has to be a \dfn{data.frame} object with at at
least two columns: outcome and subject identifier (arguments \dfn{y} and
\dfn{id} respectively).

In the case of estimating the ICC for the concordance setting, a third
column with the method identifier must be provided (the argument
\dfn{met}). The argument \dfn{type} is used to identify the setting in
which the ICC should be estimated. Valid values are: \dfn{rep} (default)
for the repeatability setting; and \dfn{con} for the concordance
setting. The repeatability setting requires that repeated measurements
are interchangeable within subjects. This means the experimental
conditions of the measurements are the same (replicates), and they come
from the same probability distribution function (conditioned to
subjects). On the other hand, in the concordance setting the repeated
measurements are not interchangeable because their experimental
conditions are different, and therefore their probability distribution
function, conditioned to subjects, is different (commonly in the mean).

The argument \dfn{fam} is used to identify the within-subjects
probability model. Valid options are: \dfn{poisson} (default) for
Poisson model; \dfn{nbinom1} and \dfn{nbinom2} for Negative Binomial
model with variance increasing linearly and quadratically with the mean
respectively; \dfn{zip} for zero-inflated Poisson model; \dfn{zinb1} and
\dfn{zinb2} for zero-inflated Negative Binomial model with variance
increasing linearly and quadratically with the mean.

Once the appropriate setting and model have been chosen, the GLMM is
estimated by maximum likelihood via Laplace approximation using the
\CRANpkg{glmmTMB} package \citep{brooks2017}. The output of the
\dfn{icc\_counts} function is an object of class \dfn{iccc} which is a
list with the following components: \dfn{model} which contains the
generalized linear mixed model estimates; \dfn{ICC} which includes the
ICC estimate and its standard error and confidence interval; and
\dfn{varcomp} with the variance components and parameters related to the
ICC. Finally, the function \dfn{GOF\_check} runs the goodness of fit
(GOF) analysis of the GLMM fitted to data. This function has three
arguments: \dfn{x} to denote the \dfn{iccc} object to apply the GOF
analysis; the \dfn{nsim} argument that stands for the number of
simulations to run which default value is set to 100; and the \(\alpha\)
argument to set the level of significance.

The output of \dfn{GOF\_check} is an object of class \dfn{GOF} which is
a list with the following components: \dfn{plot\_env}, a plot of RQR
envelopes with the original RQR; \dfn{plot\_var}, a plot of the
simulated RQR dispersion; \dfn{plot\_zi}, a plot of the count of zeros
in the simulated datasets; \dfn{res\_var}, the dispersion of RQR from
the original sample; \dfn{pval\_var}, the proportion of simulated RQR
dispersion that are greater than the original dispersion that can be
interpreted as a simulated P-value to check the goodness of fit on
dispersion; \dfn{zero\_count}, the count of zeros in the original
sample; and \dfn{pval\_zi}, the proportion of simulated zero count that
are greater than that of the original sample. It can be interpreted as a
simulated P-value to check the hypothesis of zero-inflation. The plots
in the list are objects of class \dfn{ggplot}, hence users may change
the plot themes or add modifications to the components.

Additionally, to describe the differences among the repeated
measurements from the same subjects, the function \dfn{plot\_BA} draws
the Bland-Altman plot \citep{bland1995}. The difference between each
pair of data from the same subject is represented on the y-axis. The
mean of data from the same subject is represented on the x-axis.
Additionally, a bar plot with the proportions of differences can be
drawn. This plot is a useful way to describe the differences when the
range of observed values is small relative to the number of observations
\citep{Smith2010}.

The arguments of \dfn{plot\_BA} function are: \dfn{data}, a data frame
containing at least the columns of the outcome and subject's identifier;
\dfn{y}, a character string indicating the name of the outcome column in
the data set; \dfn{id} a character string indicating the name of the
subjects column in the data set; \dfn{rm}, a character string indicating
the name of the column that stands for the repeated measurements in the
data set. This argument is only needed to identify the differences;
\dfn{type}, argument used to choose the plot to be drawn. Valid values
are: \dfn{BA} (default) for the Bland-Altman plot; and \dfn{bars} for
the bar plot of the differences. Besides the plots, the function
provides a dataframe object that contains the data used to generate the
plot.

\hypertarget{examples}{%
\section{Examples}\label{examples}}

The package includes three real data sets as examples that covers the
repeatability and concordance settings.

\hypertarget{sparrow-fledglings-paternity-example}{%
\subsection{Sparrow fledglings paternity
example}\label{sparrow-fledglings-paternity-example}}

In the Sparrow fledglings paternity example, the incidence of extra-pair
paternity (EPP) was monitored over 3 breeding seasons in a sparrow
colony in Lundy, an island off the southwest coast of England
\citep{Schroeder2012}. One of the aims of the study was to assess the
repeatability of counts of fledglings that a male had in every breeding
season. Thus, the repeated measurements are assumed to be exchangeable
replicates. However, the means of the Social variable by year seem to
differ:

\begin{Schunk}
\begin{Sinput}
library(iccCounts)
library(dplyr)
EPP %>% group_by(Year) %>% summarize(Mean=mean(Social),SD=sd(Social))
\end{Sinput}
\begin{Soutput}
#> # A tibble: 3 x 3
#>    Year  Mean    SD
#>   <int> <dbl> <dbl>
#> 1  2003  3.19  3.10
#> 2  2004  2.53  2.21
#> 3  2005  4.5   2.79
\end{Soutput}
\end{Schunk}

In case these means were significantly different the repeated
measurements could not be considered as exchangeable, and consequently
the differences among the means of the repeated measurements should be
included in the agreement index. This led us to the concordance setting
considering Year as the methods effect.

The first model to consider is the Poisson model. The default option in
the \dfn{icc\_counts} function is the Poisson model, and so it is
necessary to specify the name of the data set, the count variable
(Social), the subjects identifier (id), the methods variable (Year), and
the concordance setting (type=``con'').

\begin{Schunk}
\begin{Sinput}
EPP_P<-icc_counts(EPP,y="Social",id="id",met="Year",type="con")
ICC(EPP_P)
\end{Sinput}
\begin{Soutput}
#>            ICC    SE ICC 95% CI LL 95% CI UL
#> [1,] 0.5284404 0.0866857 0.3383706 0.6770822
\end{Soutput}
\begin{Sinput}
VarComp(EPP_P)
\end{Sinput}
\begin{Soutput}
#>        mu     BSVar     BMVar
#>  3.172783 0.4002965 0.0798841
\end{Soutput}
\end{Schunk}

The function \dfn{ICC} applied to the \dfn{iccc} object shows that the
ICC estimate is 0.53 (95\% confidence interval: 0.34 - 0.68). Moreover,
the function \dfn{VarComp} gives the parameters involved in the ICC
estimator, which in this case are the overall mean, the between-subjects
variance and the between-methods variability (the two latter in
log-scale).

However, as mentioned in the previous section, the validity of the ICC
estimate is linked to the validity of the model. The function
\dfn{GOF\_check} is applied to the \dfn{iccc} object to run the
simulations and to compute the RQR. The random seed is set for the sake
of the reproducibility of the example.

\begin{Schunk}
\begin{Sinput}
set.seed(100)
EPP_P.gof <- GOF_check(EPP_P)
\end{Sinput}
\end{Schunk}

\begin{Schunk}
\begin{Sinput}
plot(EPP_P.gof)
\end{Sinput}
\end{Schunk}

Figure \ref{fig:figure1}a shows the plot of RQR with envelopes generated
by simulation. Points on the plot stand for the RQR from the original
sample. Notice that a substantial number of points lie outside the
envelopes, indicating the fit of the model is unsuitable. The next plot
(Figure \ref{fig:figure1}c) shows the density of the RQR variances
computed in the simulated samples. The RQR variance from the initial
sample is 2.15 (shown inside the square) which is extreme compared to
those from the simulations. Indeed, the proportion of simulated
variances that are higher than that from the initial sample can be
interpreted as a p-value generated by Monte Carlo simulation. This
p-value is shown by applying the function \dfn{DispersionTest} to the
\dfn{GOF} object.

\begin{Schunk}
\begin{Sinput}
DispersionTest(EPP_P.gof)
\end{Sinput}
\begin{Soutput}
#>         S    P_value
#>  2.077549 0.00990099
\end{Soutput}
\end{Schunk}

Additionally, the Social variable has a considerable proportion of zero
values (\(26.4\%\)), and so the excess of zeros could be the cause of
the unsuitable fitting of the Poisson model. To check this hypothesis,
the third plot generated shows the proportion of zeros in the simulated
data sets (Figure \ref{fig:figure1}e). The count of zeros in the sample
is 51, which exceeds the expected count under the Poisson model. Again,
the proportion of simulated zero counts that are higher than that from
the initial sample can be interpreted as a p-value generated by Monte
Carlo simulation. This p-value is obtained by applying the function
\dfn{ZeroTest} to the \dfn{GOF} object.

\begin{Schunk}
\begin{Sinput}
ZeroTest(EPP_P.gof)
\end{Sinput}
\begin{Soutput}
#>  Count    P_value
#>     51 0.00990099
\end{Soutput}
\end{Schunk}

Thus, it is necessary to use a model able to provide a proportion of
zeros higher than that expected under the Poisson assumption. This model
could be the Zero-Inflated Poisson (ZIP) model.

\begin{Schunk}
\begin{Sinput}
EPP_ZIP<-icc_counts(EPP,y="Social",id="id",met="Year",type="con",fam="zip")
ICC(EPP_ZIP)
\end{Sinput}
\begin{Soutput}
#>            ICC    SE ICC 95% CI LL 95% CI UL
#> [1,] 0.0477628 0.0362002  -0.02331 0.1183553
\end{Soutput}
\begin{Sinput}
VarComp(EPP_ZIP)
\end{Sinput}
\begin{Soutput}
#>        mu    BSVar     BMVar        Pi
#>  4.487117 0.033328 0.0328427 0.2446678
\end{Soutput}
\end{Schunk}

In this case, the ICC is much lower than in the Poisson model (0.05,
95\% CI: -0.02, 0.12) indicating a non-significant ICC. The ICC
components are the same as those in the Poisson case (with different
values) plus the proportion of excess of zeros (0.24). Next step is to
check whether the model correctly fits the data.

\begin{Schunk}
\begin{Sinput}
set.seed(100)
EPP_ZIP.gof <- GOF_check(EPP_ZIP)
\end{Sinput}
\end{Schunk}

\begin{Schunk}
\begin{Sinput}
plot(EPP_ZIP.gof)
\end{Sinput}
\end{Schunk}

\begin{Schunk}
\begin{figure}
\includegraphics{carrasco_files/figure-latex/figure1-1} \caption[Goodness of fit for Sparrow fledglings paternity example]{Goodness of fit for Sparrow fledglings paternity example. The Randomized Quantile Residuals (RQR) and counts of zeros of original data are compared to those from simulated data under the fitted model. The plots shown are RQR with envelopes, dispersion of RQR and count of zeros. Left column shows results for Poisson model while the plots for Zero Inflated Poisson (ZIP) model are on right column.}\label{fig:figure1}
\end{figure}
\end{Schunk}

Figure \ref{fig:figure1}b shows the model to be appropriate because all
the RQR are within the envelopes. Additionally, the dispersion and the
proportion of zeros from the initial sample are within the values
expected under the ZIP model (Figures \ref{fig:figure1}d and
\ref{fig:figure1}f). This fact can be also verified by verifying that
dispersion and excess of zeros tests are non significant.

\begin{Schunk}
\begin{Sinput}
DispersionTest(EPP_ZIP.gof)
\end{Sinput}
\begin{Soutput}
#>         S   P_value
#>  3.214152 0.5643564
\end{Soutput}
\begin{Sinput}
ZeroTest(EPP_ZIP.gof)
\end{Sinput}
\begin{Soutput}
#>  Count   P_value
#>     51 0.4752475
\end{Soutput}
\end{Schunk}

Thus, the ZIP model fits the data appropriately. The next step is to
check if the differences in means between years are significant and the
concordance setting is therefore justified. With this aim let us apply
the function \dfn{icc\_counts} to the ZIP model but in the repeatability
setting.

\begin{Schunk}
\begin{Sinput}
EPP_ZIP_0<-icc_counts(EPP,y="Social",id="id",fam="zip")
\end{Sinput}
\end{Schunk}

The component \dfn{model} in the \dfn{iccc} object is an object of class
\dfn{glmmTMB} that contains the generalized linear mixed model fit. The
\dfn{anova} method applied to the model objects gives a comparison of
deviances and a likelihood ratio test:

\begin{Schunk}
\begin{Sinput}
anova(EPP_ZIP$model,EPP_ZIP_0$model)
\end{Sinput}
\begin{Soutput}
#> Data: data
#> Models:
#> EPP_ZIP_0$model: y ~ (1 | id), zi=~1, disp=~1
#> EPP_ZIP$model: y ~ met + (1 | id), zi=~1, disp=~1
#>                 Df    AIC    BIC  logLik deviance  Chisq Chi Df Pr(>Chisq)    
#> EPP_ZIP_0$model  3 847.63 857.42 -420.82   841.63                             
#> EPP_ZIP$model    5 836.35 852.67 -413.18   826.35 15.279      2  0.0004811 ***
#> ---
#> Signif. codes:  0 '***' 0.001 '**' 0.01 '*' 0.05 '.' 0.1 ' ' 1
\end{Soutput}
\end{Schunk}

The result of the comparison confirms a significant difference between
the yearly means, and the convenience of the concordance setting.

Next, let us apply the function \dfn{plot\_BA} to generate the
Bland-Altman plot and the bar plot of the differences in EPP between
years. The plots are shown in Figures \ref{fig:figure4}a and
\ref{fig:figure4}b.

\begin{Schunk}
\begin{Sinput}
EPP.BA<-plot_BA(EPP,y="Social",id="id",rm="Year") # Bland-Altman plot
\end{Sinput}
\end{Schunk}

\begin{Schunk}
\begin{Sinput}
plot_BA(EPP,y="Social",id="id",type="bars") # Bar plot
\end{Sinput}
\end{Schunk}

It can be seen that the magnitude of the differences grows as the mean
increases. This heteroscedastic pattern is expected in counts because of
the relation between the within-subjects variance and mean. Furthermore,
we can compute some descriptive statistics of the differences:

\begin{Schunk}
\begin{Sinput}
summary(EPP.BA$data$Diff)
\end{Sinput}
\begin{Soutput}
#>    Min. 1st Qu.  Median    Mean 3rd Qu.    Max. 
#> -7.0000 -1.0000  1.0000  0.9737  3.0000 10.0000
\end{Soutput}
\begin{Sinput}
quantile(EPP.BA$data$Diff,probs=c(0.05,0.95))
\end{Sinput}
\begin{Soutput}
#>  5% 95% 
#>  -4   6
\end{Soutput}
\end{Schunk}

Briefly, the mean of the differences between years is 0.97 fledglings,
and the median is 1 fledgling. Ninety percent of the differences are
between -4 and 6 fledglings between years.

\hypertarget{cd34-count-cell-example}{%
\subsection{CD34+ count cell example}\label{cd34-count-cell-example}}

The dataset \dfn{AF} includes data where a new method of flow cytometry
for counting CD34+ cells is compared to the readings obtained by a
standard approach (Fornas et al., 2000). Both methods (coded as 1 and 3
in the dataset) were applied to a sample of 20 subjects. The aim of the
study is to assess the interchangeability between the methods so it is
necessary to evaluate the degree of concordance. Hence, the ICC used
here concurs with the concordance correlation coefficient estimated by
variance components \citep{carrasco2003}.

Let's firstly consider the Poisson model. As we are facing a concordance
analysis, in the \dfn{icc\_counts} function the name of the method's
variable (\dfn{met}) has to be provided along with the counts variable
(\dfn{y}) and subject's identifier (\dfn{id}). Additionally, it is
necessary to specify the concordance analysis in the type argument
because the default is the repeatability analysis.

\begin{Schunk}
\begin{Sinput}
AF_P <- icc_counts(AF, y = "y", id = "id", met = "met", type = "con")
ICC(AF_P)
\end{Sinput}
\begin{Soutput}
#>            ICC   SE ICC 95% CI LL 95% CI UL
#> [1,] 0.8472696 0.021989 0.7982025 0.8851678
\end{Soutput}
\begin{Sinput}
VarComp(AF_P)
\end{Sinput}
\begin{Soutput}
#>       mu    BSVar     BMVar
#>  761.809 1.234619 0.1199439
\end{Soutput}
\end{Schunk}

The function \dfn{ICC} applied to the \dfn{iccc} object shows that the
ICC estimate is 0.85 (95\% confidence interval: 0.80, 0.89). Moreover,
the function \dfn{VarComp} gives the parameters involved in the ICC
estimator. In this case are the overall mean (mu), the between-subjects
variance (BSVar) and the between-methods variability (BMVar) (the two
last in log-scale).

Next, let's check the validity of the model by applying the function
\dfn{GOF\_check} to the \dfn{iccc} object.

\begin{Schunk}
\begin{Sinput}
set.seed(100)
AF_P.gof <- GOF_check(AF_P)
\end{Sinput}
\end{Schunk}

Figure \ref{fig:figure2}a shows the plot of RQR with envelopes generated
by simulation. Points on the plot stand for the RQR from the original
sample. Most of points lie outside of the envelopes indicating the
unsuitable fit of the model. Next plot (Figure \ref{fig:figure2}b) shows
the density of the RQR variances computed at the simulated samples. The
RQR variance from the initial sample is 32.2 which is much larger than
those from the simulations. The p-value to test overdispersion is
obtained by applying the function \dfn{DispersionTest} to the \dfn{GOF}.
With regards the zero inflation, no zeros were found in data so it is
unnecessary to check this issue.

\begin{Schunk}
\begin{Sinput}
DispersionTest(AF_P.gof)
\end{Sinput}
\begin{Soutput}
#>         S    P_value
#>  32.20049 0.00990099
\end{Soutput}
\end{Schunk}

Consequently, it is necessary to use a model able to afford the
overdispersion as the Negative Binomial distribution.

\begin{Schunk}
\begin{Sinput}
AF_NB2 <- icc_counts(AF, y = "y", id = "id", met = "met", type = "con", fam = "nbinom2")
ICC(AF_NB2)
\end{Sinput}
\begin{Soutput}
#>           ICC    SE ICC 95% CI LL 95% CI UL
#> [1,] 0.834794 0.0454062 0.7212048 0.9046669
\end{Soutput}
\begin{Sinput}
VarComp(AF_NB2)
\end{Sinput}
\begin{Soutput}
#>        mu    BSVar     BMVar         r
#>  777.1946 1.188904 0.0809433 0.0488122
\end{Soutput}
\end{Schunk}

In this case, the ICC is quite similar to that from the Poisson model
(0.83, 95\% CI: 0.72, 0.90) but the confidence interval is wider. The
ICC components are the same as those from the Poisson case (with
different values) plus the Negative Binomial dispersion parameter
(0.049). Concerning the fit of the model,

\begin{Schunk}
\begin{Sinput}
set.seed(100)
AF_NB2.gof <- GOF_check(AF_NB2)
\end{Sinput}
\end{Schunk}

\begin{Schunk}
\begin{Sinput}
plot(AF_NB2.gof)
\end{Sinput}
\end{Schunk}

\begin{Schunk}
\begin{figure}
\includegraphics{carrasco_files/figure-latex/figure2-1} \caption[Goodness of fit for CD34 cell count example]{Goodness of fit for CD34 cell count example. The Randomized Quantile Residuals (RQR) of original data are compared to those from simulated data under the fitted model. The plots shown are RQR with envelopes, and dispersion of RQR. First row shows results for Poisson model while the plots for Negative Binomial model are on second row.}\label{fig:figure2}
\end{figure}
\end{Schunk}

in Figure \ref{fig:figure2}c all the RQR are within the envelopes
indicating the appropriateness of the model. Additionally, the
dispersion from the initial sample is within the expected values (Figure
\ref{fig:figure2}d). This result is also confirmed by running the
dispersion test:

\begin{Schunk}
\begin{Sinput}
DispersionTest(AF_NB2.gof)
\end{Sinput}
\begin{Soutput}
#>          S   P_value
#>  0.8002765 0.4059406
\end{Soutput}
\end{Schunk}

Figures \ref{fig:figure4}c and \ref{fig:figure4}d show the Bland-Altman
plot and the Bar plot of the differences between method 1 and 2 that are
generated by the following commands:

\begin{Schunk}
\begin{Sinput}
AF.BA <- plot_BA(AF,y="y",id="id", rm="met") # Bland-Altman plot
\end{Sinput}
\end{Schunk}

\begin{Schunk}
\begin{Sinput}
plot_BA(AF,y="y",id="id", type="bars") # Bar plot
\end{Sinput}
\end{Schunk}

It can be seen that for values of the mean below 700 the within-subjects
differences are very close to 0. However, for larger values of the mean
there is a trend in the differences in relation to the mean values.

\hypertarget{tick-counts-example}{%
\subsection{Tick counts example}\label{tick-counts-example}}

In this study, the repeatability of line transects survey method to
estimate tick abundance was assessed \citep{Pia2021} in the area of
Grimso (Sweden). With this aim, sampling was performed by two parallel
transects separated by 1m-2m where the total count of ticks was
recorded. Here, the transects are the cluster variable and every pair of
data from the same transect are considered as replicates. Data is stored
in the package as the \dfn{Grimso} object.

As seen before the first model to consider is the Poisson model. As it
is a repeatability analysis, in the \dfn{icc\_counts} function we just
need to provide the name of the counts variable (\dfn{Tot}) and
subject's identifier (\dfn{TransectID}).

\begin{Schunk}
\begin{Sinput}
G_P <- icc_counts(Grimso, y = "Tot", id = "TransectID")
ICC(G_P)
\end{Sinput}
\begin{Soutput}
#>            ICC    SE ICC 95% CI LL 95% CI UL
#> [1,] 0.3494333 0.1369518 0.0589753 0.5853431
\end{Soutput}
\begin{Sinput}
VarComp(G_P)
\end{Sinput}
\begin{Soutput}
#>         mu    BSVar
#>  0.2072297 1.278685
\end{Soutput}
\end{Schunk}

The function \dfn{ICC} applied to the \dfn{iccc} object shows that the
ICC estimate is 0.35 (95\% confidence interval: 0.06, 0.59). The
function \dfn{VarComp} gives the parameters involved in the ICC
estimator: the overall mean and the between-subjects variance (the
latter in log-scale).

Let's apply the function \dfn{GOF\_check} to the \dfn{iccc} object to
check the validity of the model.

\begin{Schunk}
\begin{Sinput}
set.seed(100)
G_P.gof <- GOF_check(G_P)
\end{Sinput}
\end{Schunk}

\begin{Schunk}
\begin{Sinput}
plot(G_P.gof)
\end{Sinput}
\end{Schunk}

Figure \ref{fig:figure3}a shows the plot of RQR with envelopes generated
by simulation. All points on the plot lie within the envelopes
indicating the fit of the model is correct. Additionally, Figure
\ref{fig:figure3}b shows the RQR variance from the initial sample (1.84)
is compatible with the dispersion observed in the simulated samples. The
overdispersion test is run by applying the function \dfn{DispersionTest}
to the \dfn{GOF} object.

\begin{Schunk}
\begin{Sinput}
DispersionTest(G_P.gof)
\end{Sinput}
\begin{Soutput}
#>        S   P_value
#>  1.83724 0.4158416
\end{Soutput}
\end{Schunk}

The p-value is 0.416 so the null hypothesis of no overdispersion is not
rejected and no further models have to be fitted.

\begin{Schunk}
\begin{figure}
\includegraphics{carrasco_files/figure-latex/figure3-1} \caption[Goodness of fit for Tick counts example]{Goodness of fit for Tick counts example. The Randomized Quantile Residuals (RQR) of original data are compared to those from simulated data under the fitted model. The plots shown are RQR with envelopes, and dispersion of RQR for Poisson model.}\label{fig:figure3}
\end{figure}
\end{Schunk}

The Bland-Altman plot and the Bar plot of the within-subjects
differences are shown in Figures \ref{fig:figure4}e and
\ref{fig:figure4}f.

\begin{Schunk}
\begin{Sinput}
G.BA <- plot_BA(Grimso,y="Tot",id="TransectID",rm="Round") # Bland-Altman plot
\end{Sinput}
\end{Schunk}

\begin{Schunk}
\begin{Sinput}
plot_BA(Grimso,y="Tot",id="TransectID", type="bars") # Bar plot
\end{Sinput}
\end{Schunk}

As in the case of the sparrow fledgling paternity counts, we can observe
a heteroscedastic pattern with the variability of the differences
increasing with the mean. Most of the differences are 0 (75\%) and 90\%
of the differences lie between -1 and 1.

\begin{Schunk}
\begin{Sinput}
quantile(G.BA$data$Diff, probs=c(0.05,0.95))
\end{Sinput}
\begin{Soutput}
#>  5% 95% 
#>  -1   1
\end{Soutput}
\end{Schunk}

\begin{Schunk}
\begin{figure}
\includegraphics{carrasco_files/figure-latex/figure4-1} \caption[Bland-Altman and Bar plots]{Bland-Altman and Bar plots. The first column shows the Bland-Altman plots where difference between pairs of data from the same subject (Y-axis) is plotted against mean of data from the same subject (X-axis). The second column contains the Bar plots of the differences between pairs of data from the same subject. The plots for Sparrow fledglings paternity example are on the first row, the CD34+ count cell example plots are on second row, and plots for Tick counts example are on third row.}\label{fig:figure4}
\end{figure}
\end{Schunk}

\hypertarget{conclusion}{%
\section{Conclusion}\label{conclusion}}

The statistical assessment of agreement is an issue that has received a
considerable attention in recent years. It is possible to find
statistical software to carry out such analysis for qualitative or
continuous data (see for example
\citet{Revelle2021};\citet{carrasco2013};\citet{DFeng2020}) . However,
there is a lack of tools when dealing with discrete data. Here, the
\strong{iccCounts} package have been introduced to assess the agreement
with such type of data considering both repeatability and concordance
settings. Furthermore, the \strong{iccCounts} package provides the
methodology to assess the validity of the model fitted to data.

It is important to note that no factors or predictors other than
subjects and methods have been considered in the linear predictor of the
GLMM. When fitting a GLMM, the inclusion of further covariates allows
controlling for confounding effects. In this case, the ICC computed
after controlling for confounding effects is referred to as adjusted
repeatability \citep{nakagawa2010}. Including covariates in the linear
predictor make sense when the aim is to estimate the magnitude of an
effect (difference in means, odds ratio or ratio of means, for instance)
adjusted by the covariates. When estimating the ICC in a linear model,
the inclusion of covariates will lead to a change in the variance
components estimates but they remain as common estimates for all
subjects. However, when facing the models for count data, the addition
of covariates in the linear predictor leads to different ICCs because
the value of the marginal mean \(\mu\) will be different for every level
of the covariates. For this reason, in the case of count data, it is
preferable to segregate the data to estimate a different ICC according
to the covariates. In this way, both the variance components and the
mean will be different.

Furthermore, in the Normal model setting the ICC takes values from 0 to
1. A value of 0 means independence among the measures from the same
cluster (no cluster effect) whilst a value of 1 implies perfect
agreement, i.e.~all data from the same subject are equal. However, it is
not possible to reach a value of 1 in the counts setting. The reason for
this is that some within-subject variability is unavoidable because of
the relation between the variance and the mean in these models. Thus, it
i s not possible to observe perfect agreement with count data but the
interpretation remains the same: the proportion of the total variance
accounted for between-subjects variability.

\hypertarget{availability}{%
\section{Availability}\label{availability}}

The current stable version of the package requires R 4.0 and can be
downloaded from CRAN
\href{https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/iccCounts/}{}.
Furthermore, \dfn{iccCounts} depends on the following R packages:
\CRANpkg{glmmTMB} \citep{brooks2017}; \CRANpkg{ggplot2}
\citep{Wickham2016}; \CRANpkg{Deriv} \citep{Clausen2020};
\CRANpkg{gridExtra} \citep{Auguie2017}; and \CRANpkg{dplyr}
\citep{Wickham2020}.

\hypertarget{acknowledgments}{%
\section{Acknowledgments}\label{acknowledgments}}

I would like to thank to Shinichi Nakagawa from UNSW Sydney (Australia)
for kindly providing the Sparrow fledglings paternity data. I am also
indebted to Pia Kjellander from Linköping University (Sweden) for
sharing the Tick count data.

\bibliography{carrasco.bib}

\address{%
Josep L. Carrasco\\
University of Barcelona\\%
Biostatistics. Department of Basic Clinical Practice\\ Casanova 143,
08036, Barcelona, Spain\\
%
\url{https://webgrec.ub.edu/webpages/personal/ang/005037_jlcarrasco.ub.edu.html}\\%
\textit{ORCiD: \href{https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1184-0753}{0000-0003-1184-0753}}\\%
\href{mailto:jlcarrasco@ub.edu}{\nolinkurl{jlcarrasco@ub.edu}}%
}
