We would like to thank the reviewer for the carefully crafted response, 
especially given the extra work during the pandemic.

As the reviewer points out, this package is under development and more
functions are currently being added to the package. The associated presentation
focused on the set of functions that are currently being used for smaller
clinical trial analysis, whose implementation has been sufficiently tested,
and whose interface is stable. We are currently writing the next portion,
which will focus on expanding the set of functions offered and optimizing
the `cohort` function.

With respect to the issue of performance of the cohort function. This 
issue has been profiled. The underlying issue is that the `on` parameter
essentially provides the grouping and the function must then go through
each column in each of the groups to see which are repeated and which are
not. Those columns that are repeated appear as their own column in the
cohorted data set. Those that are not are returned in a data frame, which
is stored as a list column in the cohorted data set. If the user already
knows which group-wise columns are repeated then using the `nest` function
directly will be faster. The `cohort()` funtion incurs overhead while
finding which are repeated.

To remedy this, we have started by optimizing the sequential version of the
code. We were able to streamline some of the code and use more performant
idoms - like `vapply()` instead of `unlist(lapply())`. Given the task, the
code is probably about as fast as it can be without resorting to C or
parallelism. The next step will be to add parallelism for larger tasks,
like the one pointed out. This will likely be added to the next release,
along with new features in the middle of summer 2021.
